Move raw-value comparison algorithm to its own PR (#294)
ietf-rats-wg/draft-ietf-rats-corim: draft-ietf-rats-corim.md

  Described in {{sec-comid-flags}}.

* `raw-value` (index 4): Contains the actual (not hashed) value of the element.

>   The vendor determines the encoding of `raw-value`.

Reviewer: I don’t think 1. is an acceptable design decision. It’s not raw if it’s interpreted.

>   The vendor determines the encoding of `raw-value`.

Reviewer 2: The Verifier in phase <= 4 treats all measurements as semantically opaque. Whether a bstr or some other measurement type (say ip-address) is "fully" opaque hasn't been defined AFAIK. But maybe it doesn't need to be as the Verifier ignores ip-address semantics anyway. The only difference is how a comparison operation is defined. 

A profile can describe semantics for phases above 4 and for attestation results too. A section on profiles can document this. But there's little value in sprinkling bits from that section in other parts of the CoRIM spec especially in sections pertaining to phases 1-4. There's nothing really special about raw-value measurement type other than its name doesn't have semantic bias.

>   The vendor determines the encoding of `raw-value`.

Reviewer 3: > A profile can describe semantics for phases above 4

That is true, but a profile can also describe Evidence transformations. In that context, a semantic mapping from an Evidence claim to a `raw-value` can occur, with the `raw-value` being assigned a certain "name" (i.e., "semantics provided by the profile").
In Dionna's model (i.e., "fully opaque semantics"), this doesn't happen because `mkey` is already the name.

>   The vendor determines the encoding of `raw-value`.

Reviewer 3: What do we do with this?

>   The vendor determines the encoding of `raw-value`.

Reviewer 4: I do not have a particular objection to line 872, as truly it is up to a Vendor to decide how it uses `raw-value`

I would say to resolve the deadlock, shall we say?
The vendor determines the encoding of `raw-value` (as per the profile).

As the bottom text clarifies already, Thomas:
`Constraining all raw value types to be bstr lets Verifiers compare raw values without understanding their contents.`

>   The vendor determines the encoding of `raw-value`.

Reviewer 3: I have no objections to what is in the PR.
I only asked to highlight that there are two cases: fully opaque semantics and semantics driven by profile.

>   The vendor determines the encoding of `raw-value`.

Author: Does semantics here refer to data format or to matching rules?
Considering matching rules, for all types, I think the profile author can define new matching rules in their profile.
They can also define new data types, but should try to avoid defining a data type on a codepoint which conflicts with an existing data type on the same codepoint.

>   The vendor determines the encoding of `raw-value`.

Reviewer 3: > Does semantics here refer to data format or to matching rules?

Primarily semantics.  But that could also have a fall out on matching rules.

>   The vendor determines the encoding of `raw-value`.

Reviewer 2: > In Dionna's model (i.e., "fully opaque semantics"), this doesn't happen because `mkey` is already the name.

`mkey` could specify semantics. If there are no standard defined mkey values, then a profile might define them. Either way, it doesn't matter to the processing rules for matching because it only cares to test mkey for equality. As long as the equality test respects data type it doesn't matter (to the verifier) that mkey might have deeper semantics. A conditional endorsement might care about deeper semantics, but again, Verifier doesn't care.

>   When used for comparison, a mask may be provided indicting which bits in the `raw-value` field must be compared.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  When used for comparison, a mask may be provided indicating which bits in the `raw-value` field must be compared.
```

Raw value measurements are typically vendor defined values that are checked by Verifiers
for consistency only, since the security relevance is opaque to Verifiers.

> A `raw-value` from Evidence or an Endorsement is a value of type `bytes` that is optionally tagged #6.560.

Reviewer 4: please remove optionally here!

Author: Done

> A `raw-value` from Evidence or an Endorsement is a value of type `bytes` that is optionally tagged #6.560.

Author: ```suggestion
A `raw-value` from Evidence or an Endorsement is a tagged value of type `bytes`.
This specification defines tag #6.560.
```

The default raw value measurement is of type `tagged-bytes` ({{sec-common-tagged-bytes}}).

> Additional raw value types can be defined, but must be a CBOR tagged `bstr`.

Author: ```suggestion
Additional value types can be added to `$raw-value-type-choice`, but must be a CBOR tagged `bstr`.
```

Raw value measurements are typically vendor defined values that are checked by Verifiers
for consistency only, since the security relevance is opaque to Verifiers.

> A `raw-value` from Evidence or an Endorsement is a tagged value of type `bytes`.

Reviewer 4: Agree with Thomas, we should remove Evidence from the equation, but just focus on Reference Values and Endorsed Values

> A `raw-value` from Evidence or an Endorsement is a tagged value of type `bytes`.

Author: ```suggestion
A `raw-value` measurement, or an Endorsement, is a tagged value of type `bytes`.
```

> A `raw-value` from Evidence or an Endorsement is a tagged value of type `bytes`.

Author: I have committed a different change which talks about measurements rather than evidence

This specification defines tag #6.560.
The default raw value measurement is of type `tagged-bytes` ({{sec-common-tagged-bytes}}).

> Additional value types can be added to `$raw-value-type-choice`, these additional values must be CBOR tagged `bstr`s.

Author: Applied, thanks

> Additional value types can be added to `$raw-value-type-choice`, these additional values must be CBOR tagged `bstr`s.

Reviewer: When you say "can be added", do you mean that a base CoRIM is permitted to have any tagged byte string as registered in https://www.iana.org/assignments/cbor-tags/cbor-tags.xhtml ? That would be convenient for me (and Ned, I think). If you mean that any profile extensions to `$raw-value-type-choice` are restricted to specify only tagged byte strings, that's less appealing.

Constraining all raw value types to be `bstr` lets Verifiers compare raw values without understanding their contents.

> A raw value intended for comparison can include a mask value, which selects the bits to compare during appraisal.
> The mask is applied by the Verifier as part of appraisal.
> Only the raw value bits with corresponding TRUE mask bits are compared during appraisal.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
A raw value intended for comparison can also include a mask value, using the type `masked-raw-value` which selects the bits to compare during appraisal.
The mask is applied by the Verifier as part of appraisal.
Only the raw value bits with corresponding mask bits set to TRUE are compared during appraisal.
```

> The `raw-value-mask` in `measurement-values-map` is deprecated, but retained for backwards compatibility.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
The `raw-value-mask` (code point 5) in `measurement-values-map` is deprecated, but retained for backwards compatibility.
```

> The `raw-value-mask` in `measurement-values-map` is deprecated, but retained for backwards compatibility.

Reviewer 5: What do "deprecated" and "backwards compatible" refer to here? Previous drafts of this document?

Reviewer: That's my understanding.

Reviewer 5: Ok then presumably the code point, and its deprecation, will (not may) be removed before ratification. No point in publishing a first version with deprecated content.

Author: It is describing common usage today. I would be ok with removing codepoint 5 before ratification.

Reviewer 2: We want to avoid conflicts with implementations that want to be compatible with both TCG and IETF. If IETF omits CP 5, then it should be marked as "reserved" so that a future spec doesn't squat on it. 

Alternatively, the IANA registry should include measurement-values-map registry where cp 5 can be marked as in use by the TCG spec.

Raw value measurements are typically vendor defined values that are checked by Verifiers
for consistency only, since the security relevance is opaque to Verifiers.

> A raw value from Evidence, or an Endorsement, is a value of type `bytes` with an optional tag value.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A `raw-value` from Evidence or an Endorsement is a value of type `bytes` with an optional tag value.
```

The default raw value measurement is of type `tagged-bytes` ({{sec-common-tagged-bytes}}).

> Additional raw value types can be defined, but must be a CBOR tagged `bstr`.

Author: I'm trying to keep the spirit of what was written before. The intention is that tags other than 6.560 can be used, providing the tagged object is `bstr`. A Verifier following this spec looks at the `bstr` as opaque binary data. A relying party following an extension can use the tag to understand what is inside the `bstr`.

> This allows parsers to distinguish between the various semantics of raw values, and lets Verifiers compare raw values without understanding their contents.

Author: Yes, this is ambiguous. Rewritten.

> A raw value intended for comparison, for example in `stateful-environment-record` can include a mask value, which selects the bits to compare during appraisal.

Author: Example removed

The mask is applied by the Verifier as part of appraisal.
Only the raw value bits with corresponding TRUE mask bits are compared during appraisal.

> When a new raw value type is defined, a comparison algorithm may also be defined.

Reviewer: Nooo. This should be a measurement value map extensionnn

Author: Trying to keep the spirit of what was there before. Happy to lose this sentence.

Typically, a CoRIM profile is used to define new raw values and comparison algorithms.

For backwards compatibility, the syntax where the mask appears under codepoint 5 is still supported.

> This will be removed before publication.

Author: Changed to use Ned's proposed text.

##### Comparison for raw-value entries

> The value stored under `measurement-values-map` key 4 is a `raw-value` entry, which must have type BSTR.

Reviewer 2: There is asymmetry in the definition of raw-value and raw-value-mask in that the mask is always `bstr` while raw-value-type-choice is extensible. The implication seems to be that the CBOR tag tells the Verifier how to map the raw value into a `bstr` so that the mask can be applied consistently.

If there is a way to write the text so that always applies regardless of $raw-value-type-choice extensions, then that is preferable. 

Nevertheless, before the raw value can be applied to the mask it must undergo a conversion to `bstr`. 

I think I would prefer a definition of raw-value that puts both the value and the mask behind the same CBOR tag. But what is there is OK for now IMHO.

> The value stored under `measurement-values-map` key 4 is a `raw-value` entry, which must have type BSTR.

Reviewer: @andrew-draper how disruptive is it to drop raw-value-mask in favor of a tagged-masked-bytes choice in raw-value-type-choice?

```
563([data: bstr, mask: bstr])
```

> The value stored under `measurement-values-map` key 4 is a `raw-value` entry, which must have type BSTR.

Reviewer 2: > tagged-masked-bytes = 563([data: bstr, mask: bstr])

From the perspective of moving the Intel profile to a standard representation. This approach would be easier as the Intel profile already defines something similar:
```
mask-eq = 1
mask-operator = mask-eq
mask-type = bstr
mask-expression = [ mask-operator, value: mask-type, mask: mask-type ]
tagged-mask-expression = #6.60010( mask-expression )
```
I could see the following being easier to migrate to than the current raw-value:
```
mask-expression = [ mask-operator, 563([ data: bstr, mask: bstr]) ]
tagged-mask-expression = #6.60010( mask-expression )
```
In terms of disruptiveness, we should deprecate before deleting. Maybe the corim spec could add a second masked value type while discouraging use of raw-value?

> The value stored under `measurement-values-map` key 4 is a `raw-value` entry, which must have type BSTR.

Reviewer 4: @andrew-draper : Add more explanation to explain how to use the `raw-value-type`

> The value stored under `measurement-values-map` key 4 is a `raw-value` entry, which must have type BSTR.

Author: I think tagged-mask-expresssion is a slightly nicer way to do the comparison. Since the mask only appears in CoRIM files (not in evidence) I don't think this has any outside effects.
I agree with deprecating before deleting.

> The value stored under `measurement-values-map` key 4 is a `raw-value` entry, which must have type BSTR.

Author: The most recent proposal uses a mask expression (named `raw-value-compare`) similar to what is proposed by Ned.

The value stored under the condition ECT `measurement-values-map` key 5 is a `raw-value-mask` entry, which must have type BSTR.

If the condition ECT does not contain a `raw-values-mask` then the comparison MUST return true if the condition ECT `raw-value` is binary equal to the candidate entry `raw-value`.

> If the lengths differ amongst the condition ECT `raw-values-mask`, condition ECT `raw-value` and candidate entry `raw-value`, then the comparison MUST return false.
> 
> If all three lengths are the same, then a Verifier MUST iterate over the bits in the `raw-values-mask` which are 1, and compare the values for corresponding bit position in the two `raw-value` fields.
> 
> If, for every bit position in `raw-values-mask` whose value is 1, the corresponding bits in both `raw-value`s are equal then the comparison MUST return true.
> 
> If there is any bit position in `raw-values-mask` whose value is 1, but the two `raw-value`s differ at the same bit position, then the comparison MUST return false.
> 
> Note that if a candidate entry contains a value for `raw-values-mask`, then this does not affect the result of the comparison.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If the condition ECT has a `raw-value-mask` and no `raw-value`, it is ignored.
If the condition ECT has both a `raw-value-mask`, `raw-value`, then the following conditions must be true for a match:

*  `raw-value` MUST be either a `bstr` or `tagged-bytes`. The compared value of `raw-value` is the `bstr` itself or the tagged `bstr` respectively.
*  the lengths of the condition `raw-value` `bstr`, condition `raw-value-mask`, and the candidate `raw-value` `bstr` are equal.
*  All bit positions in `raw-value-mask` whose value is 1 must imply that the bit values at the same position in both the condition `raw-value` `bstr` and the candidate `raw-value` `bstr` are equal.

Note that the candidate's `raw-value-mask` is ignored if it exists.
```
We can simplify if we want to treat `bstr` and `tagged-bytes` as different since they have different CBOR encodings, and since `bstr` isn't in the base CDDL's `$raw-value-type-choice`, but I figured there would likely be confusion about tagged-bytes vs non-tagged.

The "mask implies raw-value is a bstr" condition is to restrict the behavior of the mask to when the raw-value is truly just bytes that can be masked. Otherwise the type choice's alternatives wouldn't have a clear meaning with the mask's presence.

The quoted text is in 5.1.4.1.4.6 seems to contradict my proposal of limiting the scope to only `bstr`:
> When a new raw value type is defined, the convention for applying the mask is also defined. Typically, a CoRIM profile is used to define new raw values and mask semantics.

I disagree with this. The semantics of a standard codepoint should not be open to interpretation. A profile that wants nonstandard semantics needs to use a nonstandard codepoint.

Reviewer 2: > `raw-value` MUST be either a `bstr` or `tagged-bytes`.

The CDDL says the only `$raw-value-type-choice` defined is `tagged-bytes`. `bstr` only isn't defined.

Reviewer 2: >the lengths of the condition `raw-value` `bstr`, condition `raw-value-mask`, and the candidate `raw-value` `bstr` are equal.

Is the "candidate" the same as the `additions`? If so, it would be more intuitive to say addition or addition candidate.

Reviewer 2: >> When a new raw value type is defined, the convention for applying the mask is also defined. Typically, a CoRIM profile is used to define new raw values and mask semantics.

>I disagree with this. The semantics of a standard codepoint should not be open to interpretation. A profile that wants nonstandard semantics needs to use a nonstandard codepoint.

The extension point in `raw-value` isn't "non-standard" in that the CBOR tagging means there is a specification that defines the semantics of the structure. Nevertheless, the asymmetry of the extensibility seems awkward. Maybe an improvement is a mask type that puts both the value and the mask behind the same CBOR tag? But the convention for extensibility is the CBOR tag definition specifies the convention for representing both the value and the mask as well as the convention for converting the value and mask to a bstr.

Reviewer: > > `raw-value` MUST be either a `bstr` or `tagged-bytes`.
> 
> The CDDL says the only `$raw-value-type-choice` defined is `tagged-bytes`. `bstr` only isn't defined.

Yes, I included `bstr` to allow for a profile to specify it as an extension and to avoid footguns if a CoRIM issuer forgets the 560 tag on something that is reasonably expected to always be bytes. There are enough instances of x509 extensions that don't add the ASN.1 bytes tag byte in front of a byte string despite not strictly following the x509 spec for extensions that the value also needs to be an ASN.1 object that I accounted for that here. Might be overly cautious.

> Is the "candidate" the same as the ACS entry? If so, it would be more intuitive to say ACS entry.

The "candidate" word is to reference the induction variable for the iteration over all possible ACS entries. It helps disambiguate which entry we're talking about.

Author: I think we need to include non-tagged bstr because some evidence might be in that format. The place where tagging is useful is in raw-values within stateful-environment or similar.

Author: We decided not to include non-tagged bstr

##### Comparison for raw-value entries

A `raw-value` entry contains binary data.

The value stored under `measurement-values-map` codepoint 4 in an ACS entry must be a `raw-value` entry, which must have type `bytes`, with an optional tag.

The value stored under the condition ECT `measurement-values-map` codepoint 4 may additionally be a `masked-raw-value` entry, which specifies an expected value and a mask.

> If the condition ECT `measurement-value-map` codepoint 4 is of type `bytes` or `tagged-bytes`, and there is no value stored under codepoint 5, then the Verifier treats it in the same way as a `masked-raw-value` with the `value` field holding the same contents and a `mask` of the same length as the value with all bits set.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
If the condition ECT `measurement-value-map` codepoint 4 is of `tagged-bytes`, and there is no value stored under codepoint 5, then the Verifier treats it in the same way as a `masked-raw-value` with the `value` field holding the same contents and a `mask` of the same length as the value with all bits set.
```

##### Comparison for raw-value entries

A `raw-value` entry contains binary data.

> The value stored under `measurement-values-map` codepoint 4 in an ACS entry must be a `raw-value` entry, which must be tagged and have type `bytes`.

Reviewer 4: ACS been an array of ECT, should this also not have either `tagged-bytes` or `masked-raw-value` ?

Author: Syntactically yes, but it doesn't make sense. Do we want a way for evidence or an endorsement to say "I know these bits but not those bits?"

The value stored under the condition ECT `measurement-values-map` codepoint 4 may additionally be a `masked-raw-value` entry, which specifies an expected value and a mask.

If the condition ECT `measurement-value-map` codepoint 4 is of `tagged-bytes`, and there is no value stored under codepoint 5, then the Verifier treats it in the same way as a `masked-raw-value` with the `value` field holding the same contents and a `mask` of the same length as the value with all bits set.

> The standard comparison function defined in this document does not use the tag value.

Reviewer 3: in CBOR, the tag value is the whole thing.  "number" and "content" are the parts that we want to refer to here.

```suggestion
The standard comparison function defined in this document only uses the tag content (i.e., the tag number is stripped off).
```

Author: I made a similar change with different text.

> The standard comparison function defined in this document does not use the tag value.

Author: ```suggestion
The standard comparison function defined in this document removes the tag before performing the comparison.
```

> For backwards compatibility, if the condition ECT `measurement-value-map` codepoint 4 is of type `bytes` or `tagged-bytes`, and there is a mask stored under codepoint 5, then the Verifier treats it in the same way as a `masked-raw-value` with the `value` field holding the same contents and a `mask` holding the contents of codepoint 5.

Reviewer 3: I think we agreed that simple `bytes` is not a valid type:

```suggestion
For backwards compatibility, if the condition ECT `measurement-value-map` codepoint 4 is of type `tagged-bytes`, and there is a mask stored under codepoint 5, then the Verifier treats it in the same way as a `masked-raw-value` with the `value` field holding the same contents and a `mask` holding the contents of codepoint 5.
```

The comparison MUST return false if the lengths of the candidate entry value and the condition ECT value are different.

> The comparison MUST return false if the lengths of the condition ECT mask and value are different.

Reviewer 3: hmm, isn't this an inconsistency that should be flagged as an error instead?

##### Comparison for raw-value entries

> A `raw-value` entry contains binary data whose meaning the Verifier is not required to understand.

Reviewer: "Not required" is different than MUST treat opaquely, or only with mask comparison. We don't want this type to have different meanings in different verifiers.

Author: I changed the text to say that a Verifier following this spec must treat `raw-value` as opaque data.

> A `raw-value` entry contains binary data whose meaning the Verifier is not required to understand.

Author: ```suggestion
A `raw-value` entry contains binary data which a Verifier following this specification will treat as opaque.
```

> A `raw-value` entry contains binary data which a Verifier following this specification will treat as opaque.

Author: I have removed the second part of the sentence.
Each subsection in this area has an introductory paragraph and I think it would be odd for raw-value not to have one.

> The value stored under `measurement-values-map` key 4 in an ACS entry must be a `raw-value` entry, which must have type `bytes`, with an optional tag.

Author: I have changed "key" in this section to "codepoint". Should there be a space?

My take on the use of reference is that if a reference value with mask matches an ACS entry, then the reference value provider is corroborating the ACS entry which exists.

> The value stored under `measurement-values-map` key 4 in an ACS entry must be a `raw-value` entry, which must have type `bytes`, with an optional tag.
> 
> The value stored under the condition ECT `measurement-values-map` key 4 may additionally be a `raw-value-compare` entry, which specifies an expected value and an optional mask.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```suggestion
The value stored under `measurement-values-map` key 4 in an ACS entry MUST have type `bytes` with an optional tag, or type `raw-value-compare`.
```
```

Author: I think it is worthwhile for the spec to call out the difference between codepoint 4 in Evidence/Endorsements and in reference values (eg in stateful-environment-map).

If the condition ECT `measurement-value-map` key 4 is of type `bytes` or `tagged-bytes`, then the Verifier treats it in the same way as a `raw-value-compare` with the `value` field holding the same contents and the `mask` field omitted.

> The tag value is not used in the standard comparison function defined in this document.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The tag value MUST NOT be used in the standard comparison function defined in this document.
```

> The tag value is not used in the standard comparison function defined in this document.

Author: ```suggestion
The standard comparison function defined in this document does not use the tag value.
```

The comparison MUST return false if the lengths of the candidate entry value and the condition ECT value are different.

If a mask is provided, then the comparison MUST return false if the lengths of the condition ECT mask and value are different.

> If a mask is not provided, then the comparison MUST return true if the condition ECT value is binary equal to the candidate entry value.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If a mask is not provided, then the comparison MUST return true if and only if the condition ECT value is binary equal to the candidate entry value.
```

If a mask field is provided, then the comparison MUST use the mask to determine which bits to compare.

> If a bit in the mask is 0 then this indicates that the corresponding bit in the ACE entry value may have either value.

Reviewer: What's an ACE entry?

> If a bit in the mask is 0 then this indicates that the corresponding bit in the ACE entry value may have either value.

Author: ```suggestion
If a bit in the mask is 0 then this indicates that the corresponding bit in the ACS entry value may have either value.
```

If, for every bit position in the mask whose value is 1, the corresponding bits in both values are equal then the comparison MUST return true.

> For backwards compatibility, a Verifier SHOULD treat a mask provided in condition ECT `measurement-values-mask` key 5 in the same way as a mask provided in the `mask` entry of `raw-value-compare`.

Reviewer 2: There's the potential for the mask in 4.raw-value-compare (or better name) to be different from the mask in 5 of both are populated. The language should be clear that if 4.raw-value-compare is used then 5 MUST/SHOULD not be used.  Or if 5 is used then 4.raw-value-compare MUST/SHOULD not be used.

SHOULD makes it harder to get verifier logic right. I'm leaning toward MUST.

> This backwards compatibility option will be removed before publication.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion

```

A previous paragraph already said 5 is deprecated. Don't need to repeat it here (in possibly more ambiguous text).

Author: Removed

|     560 | `bytes`             | tagged-bytes, see {{sec-common-tagged-bytes}}                 | {{&SELF}} |
|     561 | `digest`            | tagged-cert-path-thumbprint-type, see {{sec-crypto-keys}}     | {{&SELF}} |
|     562 | `bytes`             | tagged-pkix-asn1der-cert-type, see {{sec-crypto-keys}}        | {{&SELF}} |

> |     563 | `masked-raw-value`  | masked-raw-value, see {{sec-comid-raw-value-types}}           | {{&SELF}} |

Reviewer 3: If you change this table you also need to recompute the cbor-tags file.

Author: I am not sure how to do this, I will move this comment to an issue.

Reviewer 4: Yes, please raise a new issue, so that we address it in next iteration!
